Changelogs for v1.6.0 (#57)
meilisearch/engine-team: meilisearch-release-changelog/v1.6.0.md

- `openAI`: Meilisearch uses the OpenAI API to auto-embed your documents. You must supply an OpenAPI key to use this embedder
- `huggingFace`: Meilisearch automatically downloads the specified `model` from HuggingFace and generates embeddings locally. This will use your CPU and may impact indexing performance
- `userProvided`: Compute embeddings manually and supply document vectors to Meilisearch. You may be familiar with this approach if you have used vector search in a previous Meilisearch release. Read further for details on breaking changes for user provided embeddings usage

### Usage

Use the `embedders` index setting to configure embedders. You may set multiple embedders for an index. This example defines 3 embedders named `default`, `image` and `translation`:

```sh
curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/settings' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{
    "embedders": {
      "default": {
        "source":  "openAi",
        "apiKey": "<your-OpenAI-API-key>",
        "model": "text-embedding-ada-002",

>         "documentTemplate": "A movie titled '{{doc.title}}' whose description starts with {{doc.overview|truncatewords: 20}}"

Reviewer: Will this code sample actually work with the nested single quotes `'` we're feeding `--data-binary`? Should we escape `'{{doc.title}}'`?

Author: Hum you are right, we need to escape them!

Author: Done!

      },
      "image": {
        "source": "userProvided",

>       },

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        "dimensions": 512,
      },
```

Specifying the dimensions is mandatory for userProvided embeddings

Reviewer: What does `dimensions` indicate here?

Meilisearch may occasionally batch too many tasks together, which may lead to system instability. Relaunch Meilisearch with the `--experimental-max-number-of-batched-tasks` configuration option to address this issue:

```sh
./meilisearch --experimental-max-number-of-batched-tasks 100
```

You may also configure `--experimental-max-number-of-batched-tasks` as an environment variable or directly in the config file with `MEILI_EXPERIMENTAL_MAX_NUMBER_OF_BATCHED_TASKS`.

Done in #4249 by @Kerollmops

## Task queue webhook

This release introduces a configurable webhook url that will be called whenever Meilisearch finishes processing a task.

Relaunch Meilisearch using `--task-webhook-url` and `--task-webhook-authorization-header` to use the webhook:

```sh
./meilisearch \
  --task-webhook-url=https://example.com/example-webhook?foo=bar&number=8 \
  --task-webhook-authorization-header=Bearer aSampleAPISearchKey
```

You may also define the webhook URL and header with environment variables or in the configuration file with `MEILI_TASK_WEBHOOK_URL` and `MEILI_TASK_WEBHOOK_AUTHORIZATION_HEADER`.

Done by @irevoire in #4238

# Fixes 🐞

* The dump tasks are now cancellable (#4208) @irevoire

> * Fix: the payload size limit is now also applied on `/documents/delete-batch` (#4231) @Karribalu

Author: ```suggestion
* Fix: the payload size limit is now also applied to all routes, not only routes to add and update documents (#4231) @Karribalu
```

* Fix: typo tolerance is ineffective for attributes with similar content (related issue: #4256)

> * Fix: the geosort is no longer ignored after the first bucket of a preceding `sort` ranking rule (#4226)

Author: ```suggestion
* Fix: the geosort is no longer ignored after the first bucket of a preceding `sort` ranking rule (#4226)
* Fix hang on `/indexes` and `/stats` routes (#4308) @dureuill
```

Done in #4249 by @Kerollmops

## Task queue webhook

This release introduces a configurable webhook url that will be called whenever Meilisearch finishes processing a task.

Relaunch Meilisearch using `--task-webhook-url` and `--task-webhook-authorization-header` to use the webhook:

```sh
./meilisearch \
  --task-webhook-url=https://example.com/example-webhook?foo=bar&number=8 \
  --task-webhook-authorization-header=Bearer aSampleAPISearchKey
```

You may also define the webhook URL and header with environment variables or in the configuration file with `MEILI_TASK_WEBHOOK_URL` and `MEILI_TASK_WEBHOOK_AUTHORIZATION_HEADER`.

Done by @irevoire in #4238

# Fixes 🐞

* The dump tasks are now cancellable (#4208) @irevoire
* Fix: the payload size limit is now also applied to all routes, not only routes to add and update documents (#4231) @Karribalu
* Fix: typo tolerance is ineffective for attributes with similar content (related issue: #4256)
* Fix: the geosort is no longer ignored after the first bucket of a preceding `sort` ranking rule (#4226)

> * Fix hang on `/indexes` and `/stats` routes (#4308) @dureuill

Author: ```suggestion
* Fix hang on `/indexes` and `/stats` routes (#4308) @dureuill
* Limit the number of values returned by the facet search based on `maxValuePerFacet` setting (#4311) @Kerollmops
```

- store and pre-compute less data than in the previous versions
- re-index and delete only the necessary data when updating a document. For instance, if updating only one field in the document, Meilisearch will only recompute this field and will no longer re-index the complete document.

Some metrics: on an e-commerce dataset of 2.5Gb of documents, we noticed more than a 50% time reduction when adding documents for the first time. With a scenario updating the documents frequently and partially, the reduction is about 50% or even 75%.

⚠️ Performance improvements can highly depend on your dataset, the size of your machine and the way of indexing documents.

Done in #4090 by @ManyTheFish, @dureuill and @Kerollmops.

## Disk space usage reduction

We made improvements regarding disk space usage. Meilisearch now stores less internal data, so require a smaller database on your disk.

With a ~15Mb dataset, the created database is 40% and 50% smaller. Additionally, after several updates, the database size becomes more stable, which was not the case before. So, the more you add documents, the more this improvement will be visible.

> ## Customize proximity precision to gain indexing performance

Author: Hum, the issue here is the users that have indexing speed issues cannot quickly see this section is for them

> ## Customize proximity precision to gain indexing performance

Reviewer: I see your point. What do you think about my edit?

Still, in the purpose of reducing the indexing speed, you can now customize the accuracy of the [proximity ranking rules](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/core_concepts/relevancy#3-proximity) based on your needs.

> However, the computation needed for the proximity ranking rule is huge and can lead to a big indexing time. Since the proximity ranking rule purpose for the search relevancy is not always necessary for your use case, you now have the possibility to make it less relevant to reduce the indexing speed. Indeed, depending on your use case, the relevancy impact can even be invisible.

Author: In your new sentence, I'm missing the fact that the relevancy brought by `proximity` is not always useful for most of the usecase, so the change might almost be invisible. Indeed, after multiple tests on our side, the impacts are often insignificant on relevancy.

> However, the computation needed for the proximity ranking rule is huge and can lead to a big indexing time. Since the proximity ranking rule purpose for the search relevancy is not always necessary for your use case, you now have the possibility to make it less relevant to reduce the indexing speed. Indeed, depending on your use case, the relevancy impact can even be invisible.

Reviewer: Ok. I edited my suggestion trying to be clearer about that.

Use the `proximityPrecision` settings:

```
curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/books/settings/proximity-precision' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json'  \
  --data-binary '{
    "proximityPrecision": "byAttribute"
  }'
```

The default value of `proximityPrecision` is `byWord`. `byAttribute` will improve your indexing performance but can impact the relevancy.

> Technical explanations: `byWord` considers the proximity as an exact distance between words, whereas `byAttribute` considers the proximity as if the words are in the same attribute or not, making it less accurate.

Author: It's not "between search terms" but "words in the documents"

> Technical explanations: `byWord` considers the proximity as an exact distance between words, whereas `byAttribute` considers the proximity as if the words are in the same attribute or not, making it less accurate.

Reviewer: Sorry, got things mixed up for a moment. I edited my original suggestion to fix that.

Done in #4225 by @ManyTheFish.

> ## Experimental: limit the number of batched tasks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Experimental: Limit the number of batched tasks
```

This release introduces a configurable webhook url that will be called whenever Meilisearch finishes processing a task.

Relaunch Meilisearch using `--task-webhook-url` and `--task-webhook-authorization-header` to use the webhook:

```sh
./meilisearch \
  --task-webhook-url=https://example.com/example-webhook?foo=bar&number=8 \
  --task-webhook-authorization-header=Bearer aSampleAPISearchKey
```

You may also define the webhook URL and header with environment variables or in the configuration file with `MEILI_TASK_WEBHOOK_URL` and `MEILI_TASK_WEBHOOK_AUTHORIZATION_HEADER`.

Done by @irevoire in #4238

# Fixes 🐞

> * The dump tasks are now cancellable (#4208) @irevoire

Author: ```suggestion
* Fix document formatting performances during search (#4313) @ManyTheFish 
* The dump tasks are now cancellable (#4208) @irevoire
```

> To speed up indexing performance, Meilisearch batches similar tasks to process them as a big batch. However, sometimes, the huge amount of enqueued tasks leads to issues with Meilisearch crashing or being stuck.
> 
> To limit the number of batched tasks, [you can configure it launch](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/configuration/instance_options): use this environment variable `MEILI_EXPERIMENTAL_MAX_NUMBER_OF_BATCHED_TASKS`, the CLI argument `--experimental-max-number-of-batched-task` when launching Meilisearch, or directly in the [config file](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/configuration/instance_options#configuration-file).

Reviewer: ````suggestion
Meilisearch may occasionally batch too many tasks together, which may lead to system instability. Relaunch Meilisearch with the `--experimental-max-number-of-batched-tasks` configuration option to address this issue:

```sh
./meilisearch --experimental-max-number-of-batched-tasks 100
```

You may also configure `--experimental-max-number-of-batched-tasks` as an environment variable or directly in the config file with `MEILI_EXPERIMENTAL_MAX_NUMBER_OF_BATCHED_TASKS`.
````

* The dump tasks are now cancellable (#4208) @irevoire
* Fix: the payload size limit is now also applied to all routes, not only routes to add and update documents (#4231) @Karribalu
* Fix: typo tolerance is ineffective for attributes with similar content (related issue: #4256)
* Fix: the geosort is no longer ignored after the first bucket of a preceding `sort` ranking rule (#4226)
* Fix hang on `/indexes` and `/stats` routes (#4308) @dureuill
* Limit the number of values returned by the facet search based on `maxValuePerFacet` setting (#4311) @Kerollmops

# Misc

* Dependencies upgrade
  * Updating CI dependencies
  * Update to heed 0.20 (#4223) @Kerollmops
  * Set rust toolchain to 1.71.1 in Dockerfile (#4261) @dureuill
  * Update mini-dashboard to v0.2.12 (#4277) @mdubus
* Documentation
  * Remove banner (#4191) @curquiza
* Misc
  * Extract the creation and last updated timestamp from v2 dumps (#4132) @vivek-26
  * Fix puffin in the index scheduler (#4234) @irevoire
  * Remove the actix-web dependency from (#4239) @Kerollmops

> ❤️ Thanks again to our external contributors:
> - [Meilisearch](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch): @Karribalu, and @vivek-26

Author: ```suggestion
❤️ Thanks again to our external contributors: @Karribalu, and @vivek-26
```

> Meilisearch introduces a configuration for a webhook url that will be called whenever a task finishes so a third party can be notified.
> 
> To define the webhook URL, [you can configure it launch](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/configuration/instance_options): use this environment variable `MEILI_TASK_WEBHOOK_URL`, the CLI argument `--task-webhook-url` when launching Meilisearch, or directly in the [config file](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/configuration/instance_options#configuration-file).
> 
> You can define the authorization header the same way (`MEILI_TASK_WEBHOOK_AUTHORIZATION_HEADER` or `--task-webhook-authorization-header`).

Reviewer: ````suggestion
This release introduces a configurable webhook url that will be called whenever Meilisearch finishes processing a task.

Relaunch Meilisearch using `--task-webhook-url` and `--task-webhook-authorization-header` to use the webhook:

```sh
./meilisearch \
  --task-webhook-url=https://example.com/example-webhook?foo=bar&number=8 \
  --task-webhook-authorization-header=Bearer aSampleAPISearchKey
```

You may also define the webhook URL and header with environment variables or in the configuration file with `MEILI_TASK_WEBHOOK_URL` and `MEILI_TASK_WEBHOOK_AUTHORIZATION_HEADER`.
````

* The dump tasks are now cancellable (#4208) @irevoire
* Fix: the payload size limit is now also applied to all routes, not only routes to add and update documents (#4231) @Karribalu
* Fix: typo tolerance is ineffective for attributes with similar content (related issue: #4256)
* Fix: the geosort is no longer ignored after the first bucket of a preceding `sort` ranking rule (#4226)
* Fix hang on `/indexes` and `/stats` routes (#4308) @dureuill
* Limit the number of values returned by the facet search based on `maxValuePerFacet` setting (#4311) @Kerollmops

# Misc

* Dependencies upgrade
  * Updating CI dependencies
  * Update to heed 0.20 (#4223) @Kerollmops
  * Set rust toolchain to 1.71.1 in Dockerfile (#4261) @dureuill
  * Update mini-dashboard to v0.2.12 (#4277) @mdubus
* Documentation
  * Remove banner (#4191) @curquiza
* Misc
  * Extract the creation and last updated timestamp from v2 dumps (#4132) @vivek-26
  * Fix puffin in the index scheduler (#4234) @irevoire
  * Remove the actix-web dependency from (#4239) @Kerollmops

❤️ Thanks again to our external contributors:
- [Meilisearch](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch): @Karribalu, and @vivek-26

> - [Charabia](https://github.com/meilisearch/charabia): TBD

Author: ```suggestion
```

```json
"_vectors": [
  [0.0, 0.1]
]
```

Now the format is:

```json
"_vectors": {
  "image2text": [0.0, 0.1, ...]
}
```

To know more about the new usage, refer to the sections above about settings or to [the documentation](TBD)

### More technical information

You can check out
- [this article](https://blog.kerollmops.com/spotify-inspired-elevating-meilisearch-with-hybrid-search-and-rust)
- [Arroy](https://github.com/meilisearch/arroy), the opensource repository based on [Annoy](https://github.com/spotify/annoy), written in Rust. This repository is created and maintained by the Meilisearch engine team. This is a Rust library to search for vectors in space that are close to a given query vector

Done in #4226 by @dureuill, @irevoire, @Kerollmops and @ManyTheFish.

## Improve indexing speed

This version introduces huge indexing performance improvements. Meilisearch has been optimized to
- store and pre-compute less data than in the previous versions
- re-index and delete only the necessary data when updating a document. For instance, if updating only one field in the document, Meilisearch will only recompute this field and will no longer re-index the complete document.

> Some metrics: on an e-commerce dataset of 2.5Gb of documents, we noticed more than a 50% time reduction when adding documents for the first time. With a scenario updating the documents frequently and partially, the reduction is about 50% or even 75%. Most of all, the indexing time does not exponentially increase anymore.

Reviewer 3: > The indexing time does not exponentially increase anymore.

It's a bit true and a bit false. Technically, it's not an exponential curve as _e<sup>n</sup>_, and the curve tends to be more linear than before. However, it's still kind of exponential because the indexing time of a constant amount of data continues to rise with the amount of data already indexed.
Let's say you index an infinite amount of tasks of the exact same size in Meilisearch, you may see an exponential curve at one point.
Below the blue curve could seem linear:
![Capture d’écran 2023-12-19 à 13 39 24](https://github.com/meilisearch/engine-team/assets/6482087/84264277-9e16-4d7f-80ee-fdd9c2417010)

But if we de-zoom, we see the exponential curve:
![Capture d’écran 2023-12-19 à 13 40 02](https://github.com/meilisearch/engine-team/assets/6482087/e6971798-cabd-4055-8341-a062a7e64fc8)

Sorry if I give too much detail, but I found it interesting to explain that we are not sure that Meilisearch is no longer exponential. 😊

Author: @ManyTheFish Do you agree if I only remove the mention of the "exponential" part? Otherwise, how would you explain it with other words?

Reviewer 3: I think removing the exponential part is good; it doesn't remove any important information.
But, we could say that "the write amplification is (highly) reduced", or if we want to keep the "exponential" thing, we keep it in the context of a filterable attribute modification, because, in this context, there is close to 0 write amplification. The write amplification of Meilisearch comes mainly from the searchable attributes :)

Author: I'm ok with removing the mention of exponential!

## Customize proximity precision to gain indexing performance

Still, in the purpose of reducing the indexing speed, you can now customize the accuracy of the [proximity ranking rules](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/core_concepts/relevancy#3-proximity) based on your needs.

However, the computation needed for the proximity ranking rule is huge and can lead to a big indexing time. Since the proximity ranking rule purpose for the search relevancy is not always necessary for your use case, you now have the possibility to make it less relevant to reduce the indexing speed. Indeed, depending on your use case, the relevancy impact can even be invisible.

Use the `proximityPrecision` settings:

```
curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/books/settings/proximity-precision' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json'  \
  --data-binary '{
    "proximityPrecision": "byAttribute"
  }'
```

The default value of `proximityPrecision` is `byWord`. `byAttribute` will improve your indexing performance but can impact the relevancy.

> Technical explanations: `byWord` considers the proximity as an exact distance between words, whereas `byAttribute` considers the proximity as if the words are in the same attribute or not, making it less accurate.

Reviewer 3: Perfect! 👍

Done in #4225 by @ManyTheFish.

## Experimental: limit the number of batched tasks

To speed up indexing performance, Meilisearch batches similar tasks to process them as a big batch. However, sometimes, the huge amount of enqueued tasks leads to issues with Meilisearch crashing or being stuck.

To limit the number of batched tasks, [you can configure it launch](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/configuration/instance_options): use this environment variable `MEILI_EXPERIMENTAL_MAX_NUMBER_OF_BATCHED_TASKS`, the CLI argument `--experimental-max-number-of-batched-task` when launching Meilisearch, or directly in the [config file](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/configuration/instance_options#configuration-file).

Done in #4249 by @Kerollmops

## Task queue webhook

TBD

Done by @irevoire in #4238

## Other improvements

TBD

# Fixes 🐞

* The dump tasks are now cancellable (#4208) @irevoire
* Fix: the payload size limit is now also applied on `/documents/delete-batch` (#4231) @Karribalu
* Fix: typo tolerance is ineffective for attributes with similar content (related issue: #4256)

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Fix: the geosort is no longer ignored after the first bucket of a preceding `sort` ranking rule (#4226)

```

<!-- The following lines should NOT be put in the PRE-release changelogs -->
Some SDKs might not include all new features—consult the project repository for detailed information. Is a feature you need missing from your chosen SDK? Create an issue letting us know you need it, or, for open-source karma points, open a PR implementing it (we'll love you for that ❤️).

# New features and improvements 🔥

## Experimental: improve vector search

Meilisearch introduces a hybrid search mechanism that allows users to mix full-text and semantic search at search time to provide more accurate and comprehensive results.

Plus, you can directly define the embedders you want to use, so you don't need to interact with a third party on your side to generate embeddings: Meilisearch will interact with it for you.

### Settings

Before using hybrid search, you need to define an embedder in your settings. You can even define multiple embedders in the index settings.

You must set them via the `/PATCH indexes/:index_uid/settings` route. Here is an example of a payload defining 3 embedders named `default`, `image` and `translation`:

> ```json
> {
>   "embedders": {
>     "default": {
>       "source": {
>         "openAi": {
>           "apiKey": "<your-OpenAI-API-key>",
>           "model": "text-embedding-ada-002"
>         }
>       },
>       "documentTemplate": {
>         "template": "A movie titled '{{doc.title}}' whose description starts with {{doc.overview|truncatewords: 20}}"
>       }
>     },
>     "image": {
>       "source": { "userProvided": { "dimensions": 512 } }
>     },
>     "translation": {
>       "source": {
>         "huggingFace": { "model": "sentence-transformers/paraphrase-multilingual-MiniLM-L12-v2" }
>       },
>       "documentTemplate": {
>         "template": "A movie titled '{{doc.title}}' whose description starts with {{doc.overview|truncatewords: 20}}"
>       }
>     }
>   }
> }
> ```

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```json
{
  "embedders": {
    "default": {
      "source":  "openAi",
      "apiKey": "<your-OpenAI-API-key>",
      "model": "text-embedding-ada-002"
      "documentTemplate": "A movie titled '{{doc.title}}' whose description starts with {{doc.overview|truncatewords: 20}}"
    },
    "image": {
      "source": "userProvided",
      "dimensions": 512
    },
    "translation": {
      "source": "huggingFace",
      "model": "sentence-transformers/paraphrase-multilingual-MiniLM-L12-v2",
      "documentTemplate": "A movie titled '{{doc.title}}' whose description starts with {{doc.overview|truncatewords: 20}}"
    }
  }
}
```
````

Author: Thank you Louis ❤️
